# Study 1 - History's Direction

- Ephesians 1:9-14
- Acts 13:13-39

## Summary

The Bible is not a random collection of moral lessons, but one unfolding story - the greatest story ever told. The story of how God raises up a ruler to redeem us and restore what we have ruined for his renown.

**Ephesians 1** teaches us that history has an author and a goal: the triune God working to restore our sin-wrecked world by bringing it under the blessed rule of Jesus Christ. We join this great story of God’s cosmic restoration/redemption/renewal as we put our faith in Christ Jesus. When we do so become citizens of the kingdom which will one day encompass all creation; our worship of Jesus is a trailer for the destiny of the cosmos.

**Acts 13** teaches us that history has a focus and a pattern: God chose to focus on one particular people, the Israelites, and worked through them to reveal his character and plan. The pattern of history is that God made promises to his people, which he fulfilled ultimately in the life, death & resurrection of Jesus. Salvation for all comes through the fulfilment of God’s promises to the Jewish people.

## Introduction

> We are the storytelling animal, there is no other creature on earth that tells itself stories in order to understand who it is.
> This is what we do; we’ve always done it, whether they are religious stories or personal stories, or tall stories, or lies, or useful stories, we live by telling each other and telling ourselves the stories of ourselves.
>
> (Salman Rushdie, Spectator)

There are many different stories which humans use to understand ourselves.

- **Evolution** tells us that we are part of the natural world, and our development is nothing more than random chance. We have no inherent value and life has no real meaning
- **Progressive liberalism** tells us that our story is one of oppression and liberation. As we identify structures of oppression we fight to overturn them. The victim is the hero.
- **Nationalism** tells us that our country is special and different from the rest of humanity. We must preserve it from external attack or internal corruption.
- **Expressive individualism** tells me that I am unique, and must create my own identity, and forge my own path. I need others to celebrate this if I am to flourish.

The Bible is not just a set of teachings. Far more fundamentally it is a story – the true story. It recounts the history of God’s dealings with humanity. It does not just make sense of our past and our present though, it also tells us our future. This narrative arc is sometimes called ‘salvation history.’ We will never understand ourselves and our world rightly until we grasp our place in the true story. Only then can we properly grasp our identity and purpose. But as we look at the unfolding narrative of the Bible we will find that we are not at the centre of the story, Jesus is. If we understand the story rightly we will see why this is so wonderful.

The first study does not turn to the start of the story, or even its end. Instead we will look at two passages which unlock the keys to understanding the unfolding narrative of the Bible, Ephesians 1 and Acts 13.

### Ephesians 1:9-14 – the blessed rule of Christ

Ephesians 1:3-14 is one continuous, momentous sentence in Greek: a torrent of blessing intended to overwhelm those who trust in Christ with all that God has lavished upon us by grace through faith in Christ. 11 times Paul uses the phrase ‘in Christ / in Him’ so that we will understand clearly that every blessing is found only in and through Him.

However, as he reaches the climax of the passage the focus shifts. We are not at the centre of God’s plans. His ultimate goal is to bring all that exists under the loving rule of Christ Jesus (9-10). In other words, God’s ultimate purpose for cosmic history centres on Christ, not us. The end of the chaos, disorder, decay and misery which entered the world through human sin, will be found in the blessed rule of Jesus Christ.

Verses 11-14 show that our salvation is part of this unstoppable, perfect plan, and brings praise to God for his glory and grace. As we come to obey Jesus, we show the destiny of the universe (12, see also 3:10). It was the gospel message which enabled us to share in these blessings. As we hear about and put our trust in Jesus, we receive his blessings as an inevitable consequence of coming under his rule (13). Paul finishes with the gift of the Holy Spirit, ‘a seal’, marking our ownership and guaranteeing our future inheritance (14). As great as our blessings in Christ are, there is something better to come, when he returns and we share fully in his glory. All this is to the praise of God’s glory (3, 14).

#### Side Note: Predestination

Predestination (5, 11) may be a stumbling block for some. Two things to bear in mind if it does cause problems for some in the study:
help people to see that Paul presents it as a blessing, as a truth to treasure which should stir our hearts with praise. Paul describes it here as an act of God’s ‘love’ (4-5). So it’s worth suggesting gently that if we find it makes us angry / confused and feel God is unfair and unloving, it may well mean we don’t fully understand the Bible’s teaching on predestination. We will have a clearer grasp on things when we have been through chapter 2.
Don’t allow it to derail the study. It is perfectly legitimate to say that we don’t get enough detail here to inform a really full discussion on predestination, but that you are happy to meet up outside of the study to discuss things. Alternatively, you can suggest they chat to someone on staff. One particularly good thing to do is suggest that if it’s a serious issue for them they should devote some time to studying it. The best book to start with is RC Sproul Chosen by God. If someone is not willing to read a book on it, that may indicate it’s not such a big issue for them after all…

#### Application

In a world which seems confusing and chaotic, it is reassuring to know that God is in control, and that all history is moving towards a truly happy ending. Furthermore in a world that encourages self-obsession, we learn that we are not at the centre of the story, Jesus is. Wonderfully, when we stop acting like the world revolves around me, and trust in him, we find salvation and every blessing is shared with us as a free gift.

### Acts 13:13-39 – Salvation as the Fulfilment of Promises to Israel

Paul is preaching at a synagogue in Pisidian Antioch to a congregation familiar with the Old Testament. He proclaims salvation through Jesus Christ is the fulfilment of promises made by God, and the achievement of things the OT people of God looked for and longed for, but never saw.

Paul runs through some of the key events in the history Israel, and emphasises that it is primarily the story of God’s actions.
* God rescued the Israelites from slavery in Egypt (17).
* God endured their faithlessness and grumbling during 40 years of wilderness wanderings (18).
* God conquered the armies of Canaan to give them the promised land (19).
* God gave them judges to rule and rescue them (20).
* God gave them king Saul, and then king David, ‘a man after my own heart.’ (22)
* God then brought his saviour Jesus, a descendant of David, to Israel.

As he turns to apply his message Paul introduces the key idea of promise and fulfilment: ‘promised (23)… fulfilled (27)… carried out all that was written (29)… promised (32)… fulfilled (33).’ The work of Jesus Christ was the fulfilment of promises God made throughout the OT to his people. This is summarised in verses 32-33. Paul then turns to Psalms 2 and 16 as key examples of this.

In verses 23 and 26 he shows that these promises centre on something specific about Jesus, namely that he will bring salvation. That salvation is explained in a bit more detail in verses 38-39. It involves ‘forgiveness of sins… set free from every sin… justification.’ Forgiveness, redemption and justification. The ending of verse 39 is crucial, as Paul explains that this justification (a right status before God) was not something the people were able to obtain under the law of Moses. This is not an alternative system to the OT, it is the fulfilment of the promises and longings of the OT.

This is the history of Israel, but Ephesians 1:10 told us Jesus is king of the universe, and even in Acts 13:26 Paul tells his audience that the salvation of Jesus is for all who fear God.

#### Application

The historical specificity of God’s focus on the Israelites matters. It shows that God is able to fulfil his every promise even in the realities of this fallen world, and in the lives of sinful people. Here is God we can trust as we live in the middle of the story, longing for him to fulfil his remaining promises and bring about the happy ending which will never end!

## What

God's plan for history is to bring all things under the blessed rule of Christ (Eph 1:9-14) His plan progresses through fulfilment of his promises (Acts 13:13-39)

## So What

Pray for a heart that delights to see Jesus at the heart of the story, not me. Pray too for a deepening awe and trust as you see God working out his perfect purposes in the messy reality of Israel's history.

## Questions

- What different "stories" do humans tell to make sense of who we are and our place in the world?
  - if they need help: 'for example, what story does evolutionary atheism tell?'

### Read Ephesians 1:9-14

- What is God’s plan for the universe?
- How certain is the achievement of that plan
- What part do we play in God’s plan to bring the cosmos under Jesus’ blessed rule?
- How do we come to be part of God’s great purposes for the world
- How does this passage help us understand the Bible as we work through it from beginning to end this year?
- What encouragement is there here if we find ourselves anxious at the state of the world?
- How does it help us when we feel our lives are messy, or meaningless?

### Read Acts 13:13-39

- What events in Israel's history does Paul touch on in verses 17-25?
- What is at the climax of the history of God's people in 26-31?
- What events in Jesus' life and ministry does Paul focus on?
- Look at verses 26-31. What words and phrases are used to describe how Jesus relates to the OT?
  - Look at vv. 23, 27, 29, 32, 33.
- What blessings come to us through Jesus according to verses 38-39?
- How does this passage help us understand how God's plan progresses?
- What difference should it make to how we read the Bible?
- What value is there in understanding the Old Testament?
- What difference should it make to our trust in God as we read about him fulfilling his promises?