# Study 3 - Humanity Begins

* Genesis 2:4-25

## Summary
The Bible tells the story of how *God raises up a ruler to redeem us and restore what we have ruined, for his renown*. Genesis 2 begins the story proper of human history. 

A key element for any story of humanity is a vision of how things should be: What are we made for? What do we need to truly flourish? As we turn from the wide-angle, cosmic scope of chapter 1, to focus in on Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden, the Bible answers these questions. We see paradise involves 4 things:

1. relationship with God;   
2. home in a place of a bounty and beauty;   
3. meaningful work;   
4. and relationship with others 

You could summarise it as God, gold, graft, and groups… 

Genesis 2 provides the essential backdrop for what is to come. *This* is what Adam & Eve ruined\! *This* is the generous God they chose to distrust and disobey. It also points forward to the end of the story, giving us a hint of what is to come when God restores all things in a new creation under Christ.   

## Introduction

NB this is a dense, rich, complex chapter and we won’t address everything that it teaches. We are focusing on how it sets up the story of the Bible.

### When & Where
It is difficult to work out how to fit verses 5-6 into the chronology of chapters 1-2, and that is not the author’s concern. Verse 8 implies that there were already mature plants and trees in the garden, and no explanation is given of the change from verse 5\. The most convincing schema to my mind is this: Chapter 1 focusses on the earth, and chapter 2 on the garden. The garden begins like the earth in chapter 1 – in need of forming and filling. Through God’s provision of rains and a man to work the land, it then moves to abundant, productive fruitfulness.   
We cannot be certain of the geography, as the references to the specific rivers might be figurative for an abundantly watered land.

### Adam & Eve
The account is a true and historical, but once again, it is not scientific or written in the style and according to the norms of modern historical works. Certainly there appear to be figurative elements, though Bible-believing Christians debate over the details. What is clear is that Adam and Eve were real, historical people. To deny this would be to contradict Jesus and Paul among others (Matt 19:4-5; Luke 3:23-28; 1Cor 15:21-22; 1Tim 2:13-14). This matters because in Romans 5 Paul parallels the work of Adam in rebellion and Christ in salvation in a way that makes no sense unless both are real historical people and events.

For humanity to flourish we need…

#### 1\. Relationship with God
This second account of the creation of mankind is intimate and personal. God is depicted as a potter, crafting and moulding the man’s body (Isaiah 64:8, Romans 9:20-21), before leaning in to breathe life into him Ezekiel 37). Note that the Hebrew word for *breath* is the same as the word for *spirit* (ruach).

Then the Lord God speaks to the man. He relates to him in a rational, meaningful way, commanding him to enjoy all he has given him. The warning of verse 17 is also a blessing from God: It is a good thing to have our creator tell us how to live, and warn us of the dangerous consequences of disobedience. Furthermore, the prohibition of verse 17 must be read in the light of 1:26-28 and 2:16. God has just given to mankind *every other* tree in the paradise garden, as well as appointing him regent over all the world. Amid all that abundant blessing there is just the one prohibition.

In light of all this the way God is named in the passage is significant: Throughout chapter 1 he has been ‘*God*’ \- the generic term for a deity. In chapter 2 he is ‘*the Lord God*.’ This is the personal name God reveals to Moses at Mount Sinai (‘I am’), that is tied to his covenant promise to protect and bless his people. It is about relationship (see Psalm 19 for a similar move). 

Paradise involves an intimate, personal relationship with God grounded in him speaking to us.

#### 2\. Home in a place of bounty and beauty
God deliberately and carefully places the man somewhere. He is not put into the raw world, but into a garden within the world which God has cultivated for him (8). While he is to explore and rule over the world, he is not to be a restless wanderer. He is given a home. And what a home it is\!

Eden derives from a word meaning ‘pleasure’ or ‘fruitfulness.’ It is full of trees he has not cultivated, but which will nourish him with their fruit. It’s important to note that they do more than just sustain him with their fruit, they also delight him with their beauty. Eden is not just functional, it is unnecessarily beautiful. It is also abundant – irrigated by not just one, but four rivers (in the Middle East, this would have been a particularly powerful point). Finally, the land had gold and precious minerals. 

\*What about the tree of the knowledge of good and evil? The tree itself is not bad. Rather it is something that belongs exclusively to God \- like worship. The sentence of death might seem harsh and unreasonable to us, but it is entirely fitting: Verse 7 shows that life is the gracious gift of God. To rebel, to turn away from God is to turn away from life. Death must inevitably follow. 

Paradise involves a place that is home, a place of bounty and abundance, and where there is aesthetic delight.

**3\. Meaningful / purposeful work**   
God sets Adam in the garden and entrusts the care of his paradise garden to him. When chapters 1 and 2 are read together we learn that the wonderful, exciting task of Adam & Eve is to look after the garden (2:15) and then to bring that order and fruitfulness to the raw, unbounded nature outside of Eden (1:26-28). He begins that second task as he exercises authority by naming the animals.

We were made in the image of a working God, so we were made to work. Work has now been spoilt by sin, but it is intrinsically good, and paradise involves work that is satisfying, fulfilling, enjoyable, creative and for the glory of God and good of others.  

Paradise does not mean sitting around doing nothing, but work that is meaningful, exciting and fulfilling. 

**4\. Relationship with other people**  
For the very first time, we read of something that is ‘*not good.*’ It is no surprise that the triune God should say that to be alone is not good\! We often misunderstand this verse because we read it in the light of the verses that follow, but ignore those that go before: Verses 15 and 18 show that Adam has a job to do, serving God in the garden, and that what he needs is not primarily a lover, but a helper. Someone not for face-to-face relationship only, but for side-to-side relationship, serving God in the world. It should be obvious that God did not bring the animals to him for him to see if any would be a fitting romantic partner\! He is looking for a partner in worshipful work. 

Marriage may be the most intense and obvious answer to the need for humanity to not be alone, but it is not the only one. Jesus Christ lived a full, rich human life. He was neither married, nor alone, but invested in rich, deep companionship with other men and women. We all need relationships with others who are not quite like us.

Having established in 1:26-27 that men and women are entirely equal in status and dignity because we are all made in the image of God, we now learn that there is diversity of role. In marriage, men are to lead and bear responsibility, and women are to be the helper. ‘Helper’ is not a demeaning term – it is one who provides a strength / ability the other lacks. God himself is called our helper in the Bible (eg Ps 30:10).

‘*Rib*’ is a Hebrew pun, sounding like the word for ‘*beside / alongside.*’ The implication was captured perfectly by Matthew Henry:  
‘*Eve was made of a rib out of the side of Adam, not made out of his head to rule over him, nor out of his feet to be trampled upon by him, but out of his side to be equal with him, under his arm to be protected, and near his heart to be loved*.’

Having named the animals in vv19-20, Adam now names humanity, including himself and Eve. When he uses the word ‘*man*’ in v.23, this is the first time this word has been used (‘*ish*’ rather than ‘*Adam*’). Naming is an exercise of authority, but note that he names himself in relation to Eve, as well as her to him. 

The final verses describe the first marriage ceremony (Ephesians 5). The word ‘*united*’ (‘*cleave*’) is a word used in the making of a covenant (Hosea 2:14-23). It establishes marriage as:

1. ordained by God;  
2. between one man and one woman (the remainder of Genesis is an extended case study in why polygamy is a really bad idea);  
3. sealed by sexual union;  
4. lasting throughout life (‘one flesh’ and ‘united’ both imply permanence);  
5. beginning a new family unit.

Paradise involves relationship with other humans, especially those who are different from us.

**The Key to the OT as well as to human flourishing**  
The Eden account gives us the Bible’s vision of how things should be. This does not describe the world in which we now live, since the Fall of Genesis 3\. But it gives us a lens through which to view the rest of the Bible. As we work our way through the Old Testament we should ask of each development and event how it contributes to (or works against) the restoration of these 4 things. 

## What

Genesis 2 teaches us what humans need to flourish and shows God generously giving this to Adam & Eve

## So What
Thank God for his abundant generosity and seek to live wisely in the light of what we need to flourish 

## Questions

* What do you imagine when you think about paradise?

### Read Genesis 2:4-25

* What things does Genesis 2 include in its vision of true human flourishing, of paradise?
    * Provide a big sheet of paper, see how far they get

We will look at it under 4 categories: God, Place, Work, People:

### God

* How does God relate to us here?  
* What does this mean for human flourishing?  
* How should this shape how we live day to day?

### Place

* List all the things we learn about Eden in verses 8-14?  
* What can we learn from the fact that God made the trees beautiful as well as nutritious?  
* Where feels like home for you?

### Work

* What work does God give to humans? Look at 2:8-15 and at 1:26-28.  
* How do you feel about the fact that there was work in paradise?  
* When have you found work most satisfying and fulfilling?  
* When have you found it most frustrating and least satisfying?

### People

* What is the first thing that is ‘*not good*’ in the Bible?  
* According to verses 15 and 18, what precisely is it that Adam needs?  
* What are we told about the being God makes as a solution for this problem?  
* Marriage is the most intense expression of human relationship, but what is the broader point in Genesis 2?
    * we need others
* Where in your life are you seeking to develop healthy relationships with those who are different from you?
    * man and woman are alike, but different

### Wrap Up

* How does understanding God’s pattern for human flourishing help us as we watch the story progress through the OT?  
* How does it help us as we live day to day in a fallen world?

[image1]: <data:image/png;base64,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>